title: the power of 2
keywords: cd, chdir, unix, shell, bash, golang, autojump, CDPATH, zsh, alias
---
2
=

"2" helps you to jump between folders in your unix shell.
It's just my attempt to _guess_ where you want to navigate
and help you with less typing.

how it works
------------

Here's a [screencast](http://ascii.io/a/1416) to see what I'm talking about.

A tiny script integrated with your shell populates the directories database
while you are jumping around.

Later, when you want to `cd` somewhere you just type a few letters (hints) -
"2" will find the most suitable directory path using the fuzzy search and
brings you there.

If you want to know more - "2" has two parts (what a coincidence!).
The first is a piece of a shell script (now `zsh` and `bash` are supported).
This scripts monitors your moves around the filesystem tree and
provides and alias for "2" and a hotkey for interactive mode (see below what
it means).

The second piece is a tool written in Go. It reads and writes the directories
database and performs the actual search. The reasons I added a separate
tool is to optimize search speed. But to tell you the truth - I didn't want
to torture myself with writing a search algorithm in Bash :)

install
-------

	$ hg clone ssh://hg@bitbucket.org/zserge/2
	$ cd 2
	$ go build
	$ sudo cp 2 /usr/local/bin
	$ sudo mkdir /usr/local/share/2
	$ sudo cp bashrc /usr/local/share/2
	$ sudo cp zshrc /usr/local/share/2

Then add the following lines to your `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` depending on what
shell you use:

	export _2IGNORE="/tmp/*"
	source /usr/local/share/2/bashrc # or zshrc

The second line integrates "2" into your shell and the first line
is used to configure it (to make it ignore some paths)

tricks
------

If you want "2" to understand you better first set up the ignored paths.
I personally don't like it to remember my `/tmp` and all its subfolders
because they are located in the `tmpfs` and there is no sense to store these
paths in the persistent database. Also, I don't want it to remember my home
directory (but still remember the subdirectories). 

You can put a list of ignored paths into the `_2IGNORE` environment variable
separated by colons. In my case it looks like:

	export _2IGNORE="/tmp/*:/home/serge"

The star at the end of the path means a mask.

Next, the hints that are closer to the end of the path are more important, thus
for hint `"sys"` it's more likely to go to `/usr/include/sys` than to
	`/sys/kernel/debug`.

Hints are matched in the order you type them. 

Another thing to remember is that extra importance have hints that match the
parts of the path after the separators: hint `"inc"` points `/usr/include`
more obviously than hint `"clu"` even though `"clu"` is closer to the end of
the path.

That's all you need to know. Happy "2"-ing!

interactive mode
----------------

If you want to see what path matches your hints the best you can try
interactive mode. It's still in its very early days, but might help someone.

To activate interactive mode type Ctrl+2 in zsh or Alt+2 in bash.

other info
-----------

"2" is an open source software and is distributed under MIT license.

The sources are hosted on [Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org/zserge/2).
